---
sidebar_position: 3
---

# Final & Const Variables
In Dart, `const` and `final` are both used to declare constants, but they have different characteristics and use cases.

### `const`:
- `const` is used to declare variables whose values will never change.
- The value assigned to a `const` variable must be known at compile-time.
- `const` variables are implicitly `final`.
- `const` objects are created at compile-time and are cached, so accessing them is very fast.
- `const` can be used to create compile-time constants such as numbers, strings, boolean values, lists, and maps.
- Example:

```Javascript
const int x = 5;
const String name = "John";
final List<int> numbers = const [1, 2, 3]; // 'const' here is optional in Dart 2.12+
```

### `final`:
- `final` is used to declare variables whose values will remain constant once they are initialized.
- The value of a `final` variable can be set at runtime but once assigned, it cannot be changed.
- `final` variables are lazily initialized, meaning they are initialized when they are first used.
- `final` can be used for values that can only be determined at runtime or for objects that need to be initialized in a constructor.
- Example:

```Javascript
final int y = calculateValue(); // Value determined at runtime
final DateTime now = DateTime.now(); // Initialized with a runtime value
```

### Use Case `const` & `final`:
- Use `const` for values that are known at compile-time. This is often used for values that won't change throughout the execution of your program.
- Use `final` for values that can be determined at runtime but won't change once initialized.
- Use `const` with caution when dealing with large collections or complex objects, as all elements of a `const` collection must also be `const`, which might not always be possible or practical.

### Important notes:
- It's generally a good practice to use `final` whenever possible, as it allows for more flexibility compared to `const`.
- Using `const` can lead to more optimized code in terms of performance, especially when dealing with large numbers of constants.
- Remember that both `const` and `final` are used for immutability, but `const` is more restrictive as it ensures that the value is known at compile-time.

